1) what is jekins and how does it contribute to ci cd process ?
  Jenkins is an open-source automation server commonly used for building, testing, and deploying software. It provide CI/CD process by automating variuos stages of software development.
  It is automation server, CI, CD, Extensibility through plugins, Monitoring and notifications

2) Explain the difference between a freestyle project and a pipeline project in Jenkins ?
  Freestyle project:
    we will configure our build or deployment process using a point-and-click web interface.
    Each project is a separate task. It is used for simple jobs, It is hard to easily share or reuse.
    It is hard to see the big picture of your entire process.

  Pipeline project:
    we need to write build and deployment steps.
    we can reuse the code for multiple projects.
    we can have a clear picture of entire process because we will write entire process at a single place.
    It is used for complex projects.
    we can have the option like, the build will automatically runs when there a change in repo.

3) How do you install jenkins? can you describe the initial setup steps?
  install java jdk
  install jenkins

4) what are jenkins pulgins, and how do you use/install them ?
  Jenkins plugins are extensions that add functionality to the Jenkins automation server. Jenkins plugins can provide features such as source code management, build tools integration, deployment support, notification services, and more.
  Manage Jenkins > plugins > Available > Search > select >install with or without restart

5) How do you create a new job in jenkins? Walk me through the basic steps ?


6) Explain the purpose of Jenkinsfile. How is it used in Jenkins Pipeline ?
  A Jenkinsfile is a text file that contains the definition of a Jenkins Pipeline. The Jenkinsfile is written using the Groovy scripting language and can be stored along with the source code of your application in version control.
  It provides a clear and visual representation of your entire pipeline.

7) what is jenkins pipeline? can you provide an example of a simple jenkins pipeline script ?
  A Jenkins Pipeline is a set of instructions expressed in code that defines an automated continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) process.

  pipeline {
    agent any 
    tools { nodejs 'nodejs' }
    stages {
      stage('Build') {
        steps {
          echo 'hi'
        }
      }
      stage('Test') {
        steps {
          echo 'hi'
        }
      }
      stage('Deploy') {
        steps {
          echo 'hi'
        }
      }
  }
}

8) How do you trigger a build in Jenkins manually, and how can builds be triggered automatically?
  In Jenkins, builds can be triggered both manually and automatically based on certain events. 

  Triggering a Build Manually:
    Open the Jenkins web interface and navigate to the job you want to build.
    On the job's homepage, you will typically find a "Build Now" or "Build" button. Click on this button to trigger a manual build.
  Triggering a Build Automatically:
    SCM Polling, Webhooks, Scheduled Builds, Git, GitHub, or GitLab, there are plugins available that can trigger builds automatically when changes are pushed to the repository.

9) what is jenkins node, and how does it contribute to the build process ?
    A Jenkins node, also known as an agent or slave, is a separate machine, either physical or virtual, that extends the capabilities of the Jenkins automation server. 
    It is allowing the execution of build and deployment tasks on machines other than the Jenkins master.

    Parallel Execution: It allows jenkins to perform multiple tasks.
    Resource Distribution: By connecting multiple nodes to the Jenkins master, organizations can distribute workloads across different machines. 

10) describe the concept of downstream and upstream projects in jenkins ?
Upstream Project:
An upstream project is a project that triggers another project's build. When an upstream project is built, it may automatically trigger the build of its downstream projects.

Downstream Project:
A downstream project is a project that is triggered by the successful completion of a build in an upstream project. The downstream project depends on the artifacts or results produced by the upstream project.



11) How does jenkins integrate with version control systems like git?
  Jenkins integrates with version control systems (VCS), such as Git, through plugins. These plugins allow Jenkins to interact with the VCS, retrieve source code, trigger builds based on code changes.

12) what is a jenkins webhook? How is it used in the context of version control integration?
  It is a mechanism that enables Jenkins to receive real-time notifications about events that occur in a version control system (VCS), such as Git.

13) Explain the concept of build artifcts. How are they managed in jenkins ?
  Build artifacts are the files and outputs generated during the build process.
  Build artifacts are essential for the deployment and distribution of software. 

    benefits:
      Reproducibility
      Traceability
      Dependency Management

14) How can jenkins be used for deployment? What are some deployment strategies in Jenkins ?
    Deployment in Jenkins refers to the automated and systematic process of releasing software applications or updates to different environments, such as development, testing, staging, and production.

    Use a Jenkins job to execute deployment scripts.
    Integrate Jenkins with deployment tools such as Ansible, Chef, or Puppet.
    Use Jenkins to integrate with container orchestration tools like Kubernetes or Docker Swarm.
